We're gonna talk about DOM events as
we saw in the earlier exercises
where we're clicking a button,
you can listen to any DOM event on
any element, such as a click or
a pointer move or anything else by
using this little on directive.
So here and inside this application,
we have a div,
we would like to add an event handler too,
do on:pointermove.
And then we're gonna reference
this handle move function up here.
Right, and now,
if we run the mouse over the iframe,
you'll see that the pointer is updating.
Actually looks pretty wild.
I don't think I realized that pointer move
events will give you fractional values, or
maybe it's because I've zoomed in this
website for the sake of the workshop.
So I'm just gonna go ahead and
make that look a little prettier,
get some math around in there, All right?
So much nicer.
And of course, we don't need to have
a named function like handle move,
we can just declare the function
in line if we want.
So we can just copy this whole thing and
put it in there if you like.
And I'm gonna turn it into an anonymous
arrow function because syntactically
it's a lot simpler.
And changes the name of the event E.
And rather than assigning to
the properties individually,
let's just change this to
m = x: e.clientX, y: e.clientY,
client x and client y are values
that you get inside any mouse or
pointer event handler, it's the same deal.
It's giving us these fractional values.
Out of that kind of OCD, I'm gonna fix
that with some math rounds, right?
And now we have an inline event handler
that is causing this value here to update.
And it's totally fine to use an inline
event handler as opposed to a named event
handler.
It's not gonna get, like that function,
isn't gonna get recreated
every time things change, which is
what can happen in some frameworks.
The compiler is always got your back
it's gonna try and do the right thing.
We can modify events using
this concise modifier syntax.
So here we have a click handler that
is gonna cause an alert to appear
every time we click it,
click that, click it again.
It's just gonna keep on coming.
Maybe we want this event to fire once and
then for
that event handler to be unregistered.
So we can add the once modifier like that.
And now if we click it the first time,
it'll happen but
then after that, nothing happens at all.
All right, we've got a few different
modifiers that we can add.
Prevent default, stop propagation,
passive, non-passive,
capture, once, self,
you can read about these in your own time.
You don't have exercises for
each of these.
These are just things that make your life
a little bit easier when you're dealing
with lots of events.
And you can use multiple modifiers
together by chaining them using
this syntax.
It's not just elements that fire events,
components can also fire events.
But the component needs to make
itself an event dispatcher.
So we've got two components in this
exercise an app.svelte and inner.svelte,
and the app is gonna listen for
events from the inner, side inner.
We want to create this Event Dispatcher,
by importing create
Event Dispatcher from svelte.
And then we'll create
a new dispatch function.
Now the reason that we need to
do it in two steps like this,
first we import create Event Dispatcher,
and
then we create the dispatcher, is because
when we call create Event Dispatcher,
svelte knows that we're currently
inside the inner component.
Later when we call dispatch,
it knows that it's the dispatcher
that belongs to that component.
If we just imported a dispatch function,
then svelte would have no way of knowing
which function was actually
dispatching the event.
Now that we've done that, so
the button if you click it,
it will call this say hello function,
which calls that dispatch function.
Now that we've wired that up, we can
add an event handler inside app.svelte,
and it's exactly the same syntax that
we used with DOM elements on message=,
then we've got a message handler
set up here, handle message.
So we'll just feed that in like so.
And now if you click the button,
it says hello, as you'd expect.
And there's nothing special
about the the name message.
We could change that to say, greet, and
then in app.svelte,
change that also to greet.
And a component can have as many
different events as makes sense.
Now in some frameworks,
we don't have event systems,
instead you pass callbacks as
props into your components.
And that's the thing that you can do in
svelte too, it's really kind of a personal
style preference the basic advice is that
your data goes down and then events come
up and whether those events are expressed
using event dispatchers in Svelte or
whether expressed as callbacks that
the component then calls is really
just a matter of code style.
I personally like the event style but
it's up to you you're not forced to
choose between one or the other.
Okay, so a fact about DOM events that
you'll know if you've used the DOM a lot
is that events bubble, which is to say
that if you have some element deep in your
tree, you can add an event listener on any
parent and the event will bubble up from
the event target to where your
event handler is registered.
That is not true with components,
component events do not bubble.
So if you want to listen to an event
on some deeply nested component,
the intermediate components need
to forward the event upwards.
And so in this case we have
the same app.svelte and
inner.svelte as in the exercise
that we just did, but
there's also now this outer svelte which
contains the inner svelte component.
So this is the middleman that's gonna
need to forward the event from outer.
Now, we could solve this by going through
the whole rigmarole of importing,
create Event Dispatcher, and
then creating a dispatch function,
and then adding an event listener to
the inner here, it's a lot of work.
It's a lot of boilerplate and
boilerplate is anathema to
the svelte way of doing things.
So we have a convenient shorthand,
instead,
when this event gets dispatched,
we can just forward
it to the application
by adding on :message.
And now the outer component
will dispatch that
message when it receives it
from the inner component.
And of course, it works exactly
the same way for DOM events.
We have a big red button component here.
And we have a button,
we wanna get notifications of when
the user clicks on that button.
We've got our onClick handler wired
up already inside app.svelte,
I'm gonna call this handleClick function,
so we just need to add an onClick to that.
And now when press
the button, [SOUND].
>> Does forwarding only work with
events or callbacks as well.
>> No, it does not work in callbacks,
it is purely about events.
So if you're using the callback style,
then you will have to pass
the callback from the parent component
through the intermediate component to the
child component in the same way that you
currently need to add the forwarding
syntax for the events.
Okay, so we got a question in
the chat just now that was basically,
how do I know in outet.svelte that I
need to forward this message event?
Where is that event coming from?
And the answer is it's coming from us,
we added it ourselves.
In inner.svelte, when we call dispatch,
the name of the event that we
pass into the dispatch function
that is the name of the event that
gets emitted from the component.
And so anything that includes
inner.svelte can listen for
those events or forward
them rather by adding that.
And that will now cause the outer
component to emit a message
event that the app can listen to
with its own on message handler.
>> So like a pop sound?
>> Yeah,
you can think of it that way, yeah.